41574: Adding Host Preflight Checks (#428)
replicatedhq/replicated-docs: docs/vendor/preflight-support-bundle-creating.md

Troubleshoot documentation. There are also a number of basic examples for checking CPU, memory, and disk capacity under [Node Resources Analyzer](https://troubleshoot.sh/reference/analyzers/node-resources/).

## About Host Preflight Checks for Kubernetes Installers
You can include host preflight checks with Kubernetes installers to verify that infrastructure requirements are met for:

- Kubernetes
- kURL add-ons
- Your application

This helps to ensure successful installation and the ongoing health of the cluster.

While host preflights are intended to ensure requirements are met for running the cluster, you can also use them to codify some of your application requirements so that users get feedback even earlier in the installation process, rather than waiting to run preflights after the cluster is already installed.

Default host preflight checks verify conditions such as operating system and disk usage. Default host preflight failures block the installation from continuing and exit with a non-zero return code. Users can then update their environment and run the Kubernetes installer again to re-run the host preflight checks.

> Host preflight checks run automatically. Default checks can vary, depending on whether the installation is new, an upgrade, joining a node, or an air gap installation. Additionally, some checks only run when certain add-ons are enabled or configured a certain way in the installer. For a complete list of default host preflight checks, see [Default Host Preflights](https://kurl.sh/docs/install-with-kurl/host-preflights#default-host-preflights) in the kURL documentation.

Reviewer: I got tripped up by:
>Host preflight checks run automatically. Default checks can vary,

I interpreted this as: Host preflights run automatically, but default checks vary in terms of when they run.

Suggested edit might be: 

>Host preflight checks run automatically. There are several default host preflight checks, depending on...

There are general kURL host preflight checks that run with all installers. There are also host preflight checks included with certain add-ons. You can partially or completely customize any of these host preflights. For more information about customizing host preflights, see [Customize Host Preflight Checks](#customize-host-preflight-checks).

## Customize Host Preflight Checks

The default host preflights run automatically as part of your Kubernetes installer. Customizations include the ability to:

- Bypass failures
- Block an installation for warnings
- Exclude certain preflights under specific conditions, such as when a particular license entitlement is enabled
- Skip the default host preflight checks and run only custom checks

> To customize host preflight checks:

Reviewer 2: I'm reading this section and think a lot of the parts are accurate, but the overall presentation isn't quite right. Happy to Zoom if we want to talk about this, but I have a few points. Instead of correcting things here, I'll just say what I think it should be.

There are three ways to customize host preflights: disable defaults (no host preflights run at all), keep defaults and add your own (e.g., add net new ones or make a default preflight more stringent), and disable preflights and entirely overhaul them. It's only in the latter case that the vendor should go get the default YAML files from GitHub and recreate the default and make changes there. In the other two cases, there's no need for that.

I think these steps should be clearer on how these things work. At present, it's not immediately clear how to use the `disableBuiltinHostPreflights` and `hostPreflights` fields to achieve these three scenarios.
1. Don't set `disableBuiltinHostPreflights` but do add `hostPreflights` -> This keeps the defaults but add more.
2. Set `disableBuiltinHostPreflights` and don't add `hostPreflights` -> No host preflights run at all
3. Set both -> Complete overhaul of host preflights (this is when you should copy our defaults and customize from there).

So I think the ordering of your steps and how things are presented could change slightly to communicate that.

Author: Cool beans. I kinda had it set up this way initially, then changed it. Will rework it tomorrow and let you know if a Zoom is needed. Thanks!

> 1. Get the Kubernetes installer YAML (kind: "Installer") and add-ons from the landing page at [kurl.sh](https://kurl.sh/). To use Replicated app manager, you must include the KOTS add-on.

Reviewer: I think "Get" should be further clarified in this step.

I was originally thinking that there was some downloading I needed to do, but it looks like what we want them to do is go to the kurl.sh site, click "Show config" on the different add-ons that they want to include, complete the fields for the add-on in the UI provided, then copy the automatically-generated YAML sample under the "Installer YAML" section into a kind: Installer manifest file in their release.

I think we should probably more or less spell this out (not that it necessarily needs to be multiple steps or anything, but confirming that those are steps could be helpful)

> 1. Get the Kubernetes installer YAML (kind: "Installer") and add-ons from the landing page at [kurl.sh](https://kurl.sh/). To use Replicated app manager, you must include the KOTS add-on.

Reviewer: I think "Get" should be further clarified in this step.

I was originally thinking that there was some downloading I needed to do, but it looks like what we want them to do is go to the kurl.sh site, click "Show config" on the different add-ons that they want to include, complete the fields for the add-on in the UI provided, then copy the automatically-generated YAML sample under the "Installer YAML" section into a kind: Installer manifest file in their release.

I think we should probably more or less spell this out (not that it necessarily needs to be multiple steps or anything, but confirming that those are steps could be helpful)

Reviewer: >To use Replicated app manager, you must include the KOTS add-on.

Since this is in the vendor docs, is the assumption that every Replicated vendor needs to include the KOTS add-on? (Not sure if this applies yet, but maybe it's that vendors who are using the Alpha direct helm install don't need the KOTS add-on but everyone else does?)

Author: Good questions. I was actually able to simplify this by cross-referencing the Create a Kubernetes Installer topic. Since the alpha Helm feature isn't documented externally, yet, we can cover that in another SC story at a later time.

> 1. Copy the default kURL `host-preflights.yaml` specification or the add-on specification that you want to customize to the installer YAML. Copying the default specifications lets you leverage the best practices provided by Replicated and just customize the parts that you need to.

Reviewer: /s

>Copying the default specifications lets you ~~leverage~~use the best practices provided by Replicated and ~~just~~ customize the parts that you need to.

  For the default kURL host preflights YAML, see [host-preflights.yaml](https://github.com/replicatedhq/kURL/blob/main/pkg/preflight/assets/host-preflights.yaml) in the kURL repository.

  For links to the add-on YAML files, see [Finding the Add-on Host Preflight Checks](https://kurl.sh/docs/create-installer/host-preflights/#finding-the-add-on-host-preflight-checks) in the kURL documentation.

1. (Optional) Set any of the following flags to customize host preflights:

    <table>
      <tr>
        <th width="30%">Flag: Value</th>
        <th width="70%">Description</th>
      </tr>
      <tr>

>         <td>`excludeBuiltinHostPreflights: true`</td>

Reviewer: ><td>`excludeBuiltinHostPreflights: true`</td>

To render properly in the table, these need to be `<td><code>excludeBuiltinHostPreflights: true</code></td>`

>         <td><code>`excludeBuiltinHostPreflights: true`</code></td>

Reviewer 2: `<code>` removes the need for the backticks
```suggestion
        <td><code>excludeBuiltinHostPreflights: true</code></td>
```

        <td>Disables the default host preflights for Kubernetes and any included add-ons</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>`hostPreflightIgnore: true`</td>
        <td>Ignores host preflight failures and warnings</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>`hostPreflightEnforceWarnings: true`</td>
        <td>Blocks an installation if the results include a warning</td>
      </tr>
    </table>

1. (Optional) Add a host preflight specification (`kind: HostPreflight`) to the Installer YAML file to define custom collectors and analyzers. The following example for the customized kURL specification shows:

    - Default host preflight checks are disabled
    - Preflight failures and warnings will block the installation
    - Customized checks for an application that requires more CPUs than the default
    - Customized checks for accessing a website that is critical to the application

>     ```

Reviewer: be sure to add YAML after the backticks to get proper YAML formatting on the sample:

` ```YAML `

Reviewer: I'm also seeing a formatting error at the bottom of the sample where the three backticks are displayed within the sample. Might be a markdown spacing thing

          spec:
            collectors:
              - cpu: {}
              - http:
                  collectorName: Can Access A Website
                  get:
                   Url: https://myFavoriteWebsite.com
            analyzers:
              - cpu:
                  checkName: Number of CPU check
                  outcomes:
                    - fail:
                        when: "count < 4"
                        message: This server has less than 4 CPU cores
                    - warn:
                        when: "count < 6"
                        message: This server has less than 6 CPU cores
                    - pass:
                        message: This server has at least 6 CPU cores
              - http:
                  checkName: Can Access A Website
                  collectorName: Can Access A Website
                  outcomes:
                    - warn:
                        when: "error"
                        message: Error connecting to https://myFavoriteWebsite.com
                    - pass:
                        when: "statuscode == 200"
                        message: Connected to https://myFavoriteWebsite.com
        ```

> 1. Promote and test your installer in a development environment before sharing it with customers.

Reviewer: I am realizing that there is not mention in this procedure of going to the vendor portal. Is this procedure assuming they are working in the vendor portal?

I am wondering if the first step is to go to the vendor portal and either create a kind: installer file inside a release, or click *Create Kubernetes installer* in the Kubernetes installer section.

That might answer a similar question I had reading through this: we tell them to copy YAML, but we don't tell them where they are pasting it.

# Defining Preflight Checks and Support Bundles

This topic provides information about how to create preflight checks and support
bundles to include with your application, and host preflight checks that you can include with the Kubernetes installer.

## About Preflight Checks and Support Bundles

Preflight checks and support bundles help to improve and troubleshoot customer deployments.

* **Preflight checks**: Preflight checks allow you to define requirements and dependencies for the cluster
on which a customer installs your application. Preflight checks provide clear
feedback to your customer about any missing requirements or incompatibilities in
the cluster before they install and deploy your application. This can reduce the number of support escalations during installation.

* **Support bundles**: Support bundles allow you to collect and analyze troubleshooting data
from your customers' clusters to help you diagnose problems with application
deployments.

Preflight checks and support bundles are based on the open-source Troubleshoot project, which is maintained by Replicated.

## Define Preflight Checks

> You define preflight checks by creating a `preflight.yaml`

Author: We're going to overhaul everything in these sections, over a couple of SC stories. We'll break it down into manageable chunks. So we can correct this then. But this is good to know, thanks.

Host preflight checks can be customized. For more information, see [Customize Host Preflight Checks](#customize-host-prefligt-checks).

### Customize Host Preflight Checks

You can customize host preflight checks to:

- Bypass failures
- Block an installation for warnings
- Exclude preflights under certain conditions, such as special license entitlements
- Skip the default host preflight checks and run only custom checks
- Include unique messaging and links

For more information about kURL host preflight advanced options, see [Install With Kurl - Advanced Options](https://kurl.sh/docs/install-with-kurl/advanced-options) in the kURL documentation.

To customize host preflight checks:

1. Get the Kubernetes installer YAML (kind: "Installer") and add-ons from the landing page at [kurl.sh](https://kurl.sh/). To use Replicated app manager, you must include the KOTS add-on.

1. Add the `kurl` key to the installer.

  The following example shows a Kubernetes installer manifest with a `kurl` configuration for:

>     - An air gap installation

Author: Yes, I thought it might be a bit complex for vendors so worth documenting as an example. Looks like you want to delete it, based on the next suggestion. Are you sure we should delete it?

    - Default host preflight keys set to the default values

  ```
  apiVersion: "cluster.kurl.sh/v1beta1"
  kind: "Installer"
  metadata:
    name: "latest"
  spec:
    kubernetes:
      version: "1.23.x"
    weave:
      version: "2.6.x"
    contour:
      version: "1.21.x"
    prometheus:
      version: "0.57.x"
    registry:
      version: "2.7.x"
    containerd:
      version: "1.5.x"
    kotsadm:
        version: "latest"
    ekco:
      version: "latest"
    minio:
      version: "2022-06-11T19-55-32Z"
    longhorn:
      version: "1.2.x"
    kurl:
      airgap: true

>       proxyAddress: http://192.0.2.21:3128
>       additionalNoProxyAddresses:
>       - .corporate.internal
>       noProxy: false
>       licenseURL: https://somecompany.com/license-agreement.txt
>       nameserver: 8.8.8.8
>       skipSystemPackageInstall: false

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

      excludeBuiltinHostPreflights: false
      hostPreflightIgnore: false
      hostPreflightEnforceWarnings: false
  ```

1. (Optional) Set any of the following keys to customize host preflights:

    <table>
      <tr>
        <th width="30%">Key: Value</th>
        <th width="70%">Description</th>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>`excludeBuiltinHostPreflights: true`</td>

>         <td>Disables the default host preflights</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <td>Disables the default host preflights for Kubernetes and any included add-ons</td>
```

      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>`hostPreflightIgnore: true`</td>
        <td>Ignores host preflight failures and warnings</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>`hostPreflightEnforceWarnings: true`</td>

>         <td>Blocks an installation by enforcing a warning</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        <td>Blocks an installation if the results include a warning</td>
```

      </tr>
    </table>

> 1. (Optional) Add a `hostPreflights` specification to the Installer YAML file to define custom collectors and analyzers.

Reviewer 2: Somewhere in this doc (maybe here) I would mention that it's recommended to first reproduce our default host preflights and then make your changes from there. We want to encourage people to use ours as a baseline rather than starting from scratch. This is documented a bit [here](https://kurl.sh/docs/create-installer/host-preflights/#reproducing-the-default-host-preflight-checks).

  The following example shows:
    - Default host preflight checks are disabled

>     - Preflight failures and warnings will be enforced
>     - Installation will be blocked for warnings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Preflight failures and warnings will both block the installation
```

    - Customized checks for an application that requires more CPUs than the default

>     - Customized checks for accessing a website that is critical to the business

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Customized checks for accessing a website that is critical to the application
```

  ```
  apiVersion: "cluster.kurl.sh/v1beta1"
  kind: "Installer"
  metadata:
    name: "latest"
  spec:
    kubernetes:
      version: "1.23.x"
    weave:
      version: "2.6.x"
    contour:
      version: "1.21.x"
    prometheus:
      version: "0.57.x"
    registry:
      version: "2.7.x"
    containerd:
      version: "1.5.x"
    kotsadm:
        version: "latest"
    ekco:
      version: "latest"
    minio:
      version: "2022-06-11T19-55-32Z"
    longhorn:
      version: "1.2.x"
    kurl:
      airgap: true

>       proxyAddress: http://10.128.0.70:3128
>       additionalNoProxyAddresses:
>       - .corporate.internal
>       noProxy: false
>       licenseURL: https://somecompany.com/license-agreement.txt
>       nameserver: 8.8.8.8
>       skipSystemPackageInstall: false

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

      excludeBuiltinHostPreflights: true
      hostPreflightIgnore: false
      hostPreflightEnforceWarnings: true
      hostPreflights:
        apiVersion: troubleshoot.sh/v1beta2
        kind: HostPreflight
        spec:
          collectors:
            - cpu: {}

>             - http:
>          collectorName: Can Access A Website
>                  get:
>              Url: https://myFavoriteWebsite.com

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            - http:
                collectorName: Can Access A Website
                get:
                 Url: https://myFavoriteWebsite.com
```

          analyzers:
            - cpu:
                checkName: Number of CPU check
                outcomes:

>                   - warn:
>                       when: "count < 6"
>                       message: This server has less than 6 CPU cores
>                   - fail:
>                       when: "count < 4"
>                       message: This server has less than 4 CPU cores
>                   - pass:
>                       when: "count >= 6"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                  - fail:
                      when: "count < 4"
                      message: This server has less than 4 CPU cores
                  - warn:
                      when: "count < 6"
                      message: This server has less than 6 CPU cores
                  - pass:
```

                      message: This server has at least 6 CPU cores
            - http:
                checkName: Can Access A Website
                collectorName: Can Access A Website
                outcomes:
                  - warn:
                      when: "error"
                      message: Error connecting to https://myFavoriteWebsite.com

>                       - pass:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                  - pass:
```

                  collectorName: Can Access A Website
                  get:
                   Url: https://myFavoriteWebsite.com
            analyzers:
              - cpu:
                  checkName: Number of CPU check
                  outcomes:
                    - fail:
                        when: "count < 4"
                        message: This server has less than 4 CPU cores
                    - warn:
                        when: "count < 6"
                        message: This server has less than 6 CPU cores
                    - pass:
                        message: This server has at least 6 CPU cores
              - http:
                  checkName: Can Access A Website
                  collectorName: Can Access A Website
                  outcomes:
                    - warn:
                        when: "error"
                        message: Error connecting to https://myFavoriteWebsite.com
                    - pass:
                        when: "statuscode == 200"
                        message: Connected to https://myFavoriteWebsite.com
    ```

1. Promote and test your installer in a development environment before sharing it with customers.

> ## Define Support Bundles

Author: @JustinN-Replicated Not with this SC story because we've got several other cards to deal in-depth with the content. But yes, this language will change and be made consistent. For now, this was a only heading change to move it in the right direction with the new host preflight info.

> ## Define Support Bundles

Reviewer 3: ok works for me; looks like it can be merged
